---
title: rendering
date: 2024-12-06T00:00:00-06:00
draft: true
weight: 1
tags:
 - kb/asp.net/web-apps/blazor/fundamentals/rendering
---

# Overview
Reference: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/blazor/fundamentals/?view=aspnetcore-9.0

To *render* means to produce the HTML markup that browsers display. 
Razor components are either *statically* or *interactively* rendered, and rendered either *client-side* or *server-side*.

# Rendering Concepts
## Static vs. Interactive Rendering
- Static Rendering
  - A server-side scenario; the component is rendered without interaction between the user and .NET/C# code.
  - JavaScript and DOM events process normally, but no user events on the client can be processed.
- Interactive Rendering
  - The component can process .NET events via C# code.
  - The .NET events are either processed on the server  (by the ASP.NET Core runtime) or in the browser on the client (in the Blazor WASM runtime).

## Client vs. Server Rendering
- Client-side rendering (CSR) 
  - The final HTML markup is generated by the .NET WASM runtime on the client.
  - No HTML is sent from the server to the client.
  - All *client-side* rendering is *interactive* rendering: *there is no such concept as static client-side rendering*.
- Server-side rendering (SSR)
  - The final HTML markup is generated by the ASP.NET Core runtime on the server.
  - The HTML is sent from the server to the client for display.
  - There are two varieties:
    - Static SSR — Static HTML with no interactivity and no maintenance of Razor component state. 
    - Interactive SSR — Blazor events that enable interactivity; Razor component state maintained by Blazor framework.

## Pre-rendering
- The process of initially rendering page content on the server without event handlers for rendered controls.


<!-- TODO: Link to pre-rendering section of blazor/components/render modes -->

# More Information
<!-- TODO: Insert link to blazor/components/render modes -->